---
title: On Being "Accommodating"
---

Niqabs are in the news again.  [Stephen Harper][2] wants them off during the
Canadian citizenship ceremony.  The whole thing is surely a tempest in a
teapot, as there has been a grand total of *two*, count 'em, *two* women
since 2011 who have refused to remove the face covering during the ceremony,
but it *has* started occasionally ugly debates on the limits of what is
generally known as "religious accommodation".

First off, I should mention that I really dislike the term "religious
accommodation".

It evokes entirely the wrong imagery.  When someone is being "accommodating"
they are doing something *active*, something they normally wouldn't do.  So
when someone says that they're being "accommodating" by allowing a woman to
wear a niqab one gets the impression that this is something that they
actively have to go out of their way to do - like changing lanes on the
highway or something.

This is stupid.  You are not being *inconvenienced* when a woman wears a
niqab, any more than you are being inconvenienced when she wears high heels.
Your rights are not being violated.  No one is forcing *you* to wear high
heels, and no one is forcing *you* to wear a niqab.  The only onus on you is
to leave her alone.  Refraining from *assaulting* someone (verbally or
otherwise) is not the same as "religious accommodation".  It's called "not
engaging in criminal behaviour".

When I talk about women who wear niqabs, I am referring, of course, to women
who, for whatever reason, have *chosen* to wear it.  We can assume (I hope)
that all rational people find any other scenario repulsive and criminal. If
you find the concept of a woman choosing to wear a niqab unimaginable then,
forgive my saying so, but you lack imagination.

When people voice a reluctance to "accommodate" these women, what they
*really* mean is that they feel uncomfortable in their presence.  I actually
*do* sympathize here - I'll admit that I find it jarring to see someone
wearing what amounts to a mask in the middle of summer.  But the notion of
an outright ban on these particular items of clothing basically boils down
to the idea that one person's discomfort trumps another person's rights.
That's not acceptable.  As blunt as it sounds, it is no one's duty to make
another person feel comfortable in their presence.

Some people are uncomfortable with gay people showing PDAs.  This discomfort
is irrelevant to the question of gay people showing PDAs.  Some people are
uncomfortable with the idea of abortion on demand.  This discomfort is
irrelevant to the question of abortion on demand.  And, yes, a lot of people
are uncomfortable with the idea of a woman choosing to cover her face.  This
discomfort is irrelevant to the question of whether this particular choice
of headgear is allowed in a free society.

Seriously, people, there are so many better things to feel uncomfortable
about.  Why put all your energy into *this*?


[1]: http://www.desmondrivet.com/blog/2012/08/04/religion-and-culture
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_Harper
