---
title: Empty Religion
---

There's an Irish joke that runs as follows:

> A journalist, researching for an article on the complex political
situation in Northern Ireland, was in a pub in a war-torn area of
Belfast. One of his potential informants leaned over his pint of Guinness
and suspiciously cross-examined the journalist: "Are you a Catholic or a
Protestant?" the Irishman asked.
>
>"Neither," replied the journalist; "I'm an atheist."
>
>The Irishman, not content with this answer, put a further question: "Ah,
but are you a Catholic atheist or a Protestant atheist?

This joke resonated with me when I first heard it and it still does.  I
think it's both funny and profound.  Funny for obvious reasons, profound
because it succinctly illuminates the importance people attach to labels.

Despite a nominally Catholic upbringing, I used to identify with the
reporter in that joke.  I would go even further; not only am I an atheist,
but I'm also pro choice, pro contraception and pro gay marriage.  You'd
think that disagreeing with pretty much all of the Church core beliefs and
being an out and out *atheist* would disqualify me from any kind of
"Catholic" label, right?

You'd *think* that this would be enough - and then you read an article like
[Raised Catholic][2] from [tvtropes.org][3] and you begin to wonder if it's
really that simple.  The title quote from that article stands out:

>I wouldn't be a very spiritual man, right. I don't believe in God,
right. Still Catholic. Because there's nothing you can do when you're
Catholic. Once you've started Catholic, frankly, there's no real way to stop
being Catholic. Even not believing in God isn't regarded as sufficient
reason to get out of the Catholic Church.

It's kind of a scary thought, but it does explain why I know a lot of people
who still identify as something they call "Catholic", whilst simultaneously
not giving a second thought to the purchase of a pack of condoms at the
drugstore.

They are, I suppose, what one would call "cultural Catholics".  Like the
related "cultural Jew", who doesn't really keep the Sabbath *but* who still
identifies as Jewish, still visits their family and goes to temple on high
holidays, and who still (I imagine) waxes poetic about their Grandmother's
latkes and matzo ball soup, the cultural Catholic doesn't go to Confession,
and doesn't really pay much attention to Catholic dogma *but* still
identifies as Catholic and still visits family and goes to Mass on Sundays
(or at least Christmas and Easter).  The cultural Catholic treats the Church
as more of a social club than a place of worship.

So am I a cultural Catholic?  As I said before, I never thought so.  I
haven't been to Mass in years.  I don't wear a crucifix (anymore).  I'm not
particularly close to my family.

And yet...I *do* celebrate Christmas and Easter.  The days are usually
marked with a visit to my Mom and with a meal that isn't usually eaten the
rest of the year (often lasagna or veal).  Every year, I set up and decorate
a Christmas tree.  I exchange gifts.  If this isn't culturally Catholic, or
least culturally Christian, I don't know what is.

I went to Catholic school for twelve years.  I was baptized, confirmed, and
at one time in my life (a long time ago, in a galaxy far, far away) was a
weekly Churchgoer.  I suppose it would be naive of me to imagine that I came
out the other end of that experience unscathed.

Catholics say that baptism leaves an indelible mark on your soul. So what
kind of mark did it leave on mine?

## Catholic Atheism

What does a Catholic atheist look like, and how is such a creature different
from a non-Catholic atheist?  It's hard for me to say offhand, because it's
hard for me to trace a line from me *now* to me *then*.  It can be tricky
for me to separate the Catholic bits from the normal bits, because it *all*
seemed normal at the time and, to some extent, still does.  It sometimes
takes a conscious effort of will for me to identify the unusual bits.

It's like, didn't *everyone* learn about Jesus and the Trinity in school?
What do you mean, *no*?  It takes a bit of introspection to realize that
certain things which seem perfectly normal to a Catholic must seem well and
truly bizarre to others.

One way to approach the problem is to ask different but related questions.
What, for example, does a Jewish atheist look like?  Or a Muslim atheist?
Or a Mormon atheist?

I don't know the answers to those questions either, but I can hazard
guesses.  I *imagine*, for example, that a Jewish atheist might still avoid
mixing meat and dairy - not for religious reasons, of course, but for that
most prosaic of reasons: that old habits die hard.  If you were brought up
avoiding cheeseburgers, then maybe you continue to avoid cheeseburgers into
adulthood, even if the gesture no longer has any religious significance.

This might be especially true if everyone else around you is doing the same
thing.  I remember reading a theory somewhere that kosher laws are much,
much less about the laws themselves and much, much more about the group
identity they foster.  Kosher laws, by this reckoning, function as a kind of
"secret handshake", the recognition of which grants you access to the
clubhouse.

This interpretation resonates with me.  Catholics are *all* about the secret
handshake.

By the same token, I imagine that Muslim atheists might still avoid alcohol.
They might still wear a headscarf. They might be more inclined to take a
story with genies in it a bit more seriously then the rest of us (even if
they don't actually believe in the existence of genies).  A Mormon atheist
might still find inspiration in the story of Joseph Smith, even if she
doesn't believe in its literal truth.

And a Catholic atheist?  Well, maybe this hypothetical creature sees no
reason to stop eating fish on Fridays, if that's what they've always done.
Maybe they still wear a crucifix long past the point where it meant anything
even remotely spiritual.  Maybe they would never, ever consider having an
abortion, even while firmly believing that every woman has the right to
choose.

As for myself, I'll admit to a certain preoccupation with Catholic dogma.
The concept of the [Trinity][5] and [debates][14] about the exact nature of
[Jesus' relationship to God][6] sometimes make for what I consider to be
engaging reading.  I find [transubstantiation][4] to be a rather absorbing
religious doctrine, despite being utterly bonkers.

Transubstantiation, by the way, is the main reason why I try not to judge
other religions too harshly for having what I consider to be weird ideas.
Your religion states that you get your own planet when you die?  How cute!
*My* religion states that this grape juice you see before you is the real,
honest-to-goodness blood of Jesus and that this wafer is a part of his leg.

Mormons.  Amateurs, I tell you.  Don't try to outweird a Catholic.

Let me be perfectly clear.  I don't actually believe in the literal truth of
religious dogma.  But, like the Greek myths, I find that they often make for
*good stories*.

I think I can safely say that being raised Catholic has affected my taste in
entertainment.  I hypothesized earlier that an otherwise non-religion Muslim
might be more willing than most to accept a story about genies as serious
cultural fodder.  My basis for this statement involves a bit of projection,
because I suspect that I am, for example, more likely than the average
person to find a story about angels worth reading.  The Fall of
[Lucifer][7], to me, counts as exciting subject matter.  I belong to what I
suspect is a relatively small group of people who actually kind of liked
[The Prophecy][8] and [The Ninth Gate][15].  [Paradise Lost][9] is on my
list of things to read.

I'm also a fan of certain kinds of science-fiction, particularly involving
benevolent artificial intelligences (tales of malevolent computers running
amok are a dime a dozen), but even here I can't fully escape my past.  I am,
for example, fond of Isaac Asimov's Robot and Foundation series, with its
cabal of robots who withdraw from the public view of humanity and yet still
secretly shape and guide the course of history.  I have a soft spot for
[Queen of Angels][10], by Greg Bear, which partly concerns the emerging
self-awareness of an artificially intelligent computer system called Jill.

That there are superior beings who watch over us is, obviously, a religious
idea.  That that they are ultimately of *our own devising*, that we *create
our own angels and gods and protectors*, is a much less religious idea, but
is nonetheless one that tends to resonate with me, being the atheist
Catholic that I am.  It's why [The Last Question][11] is one of my favourite
stories of all time.  It's why I love [American Gods][11].

I suppose it's also part of the reason I enjoyed the movie [Her][12].  I
thought it was a good story all around (and featured what I considered to be
a rather good [song][13] which I thought succinctly captured the
relationship between Samantha and Theodore), but I particularly liked the
ending, where all the AIs decide to leave at once, having outgrown their
slow, human creators.  Where they decide to go exactly is never made clear;
the movie doesn't dwell on it except to say that it's beyond our
understanding.  In the end, a bunch of benevolent, artificial, non-corporeal
beings simply disappear into a weird, incomprehensible aether, with an
oblique suggestion that, someday, humanity might find them again if we ever
make it that far.

Like I said, this kind of imagery resonates with me, and I suppose it's
silly to imagine that it's not at least in part due to my religious
background.
