---
title: Reflections on the Ethnic Vote
tags: quebec
---

Jacques Parizeau died not too long ago.  He infamously commented that the
1995 Quebec Referendum was lost due to [money and the ethnic vote][1]

I was in high school, in Toronto, during the referendum.  I remember the
whole thing being followed very closely by my school.  I remember feeling
relief when the "No" side won (by a hair) and I remember the uproar that his
statement caused afterwards.

A word about my background before we go on.  It's a bit of a mixed bag.  I
have a British first name (Desmond) and a French last name (Rivet).  My
mother is Sicilian.  My father was French Canadian, though not technically
Quebecois by birth (he was born in Sudbury).  I myself was born in Montreal,
so I *am*, in fact, a Quebecois by birth, but an Anglophone one, despite my
name.  To make things more complicated, I spent a lot of my formative years
(high school, University) in Toronto, so people often assume I'm from there.

Given this kind of background, it's sometimes hard to say where my loyalties
lie, but I think it's probably safe to say that they lie with specific
people rather abstract, disembodied ideas like "Canada" or "Quebec" or
"Italians".

Anyway, I can remember everyone being quite offended at his remarks, but I
*also* remember not being quite as offended as everyone else.  Of course I
suppose I *would* say that, being Caucasian, but really I just remember
thinking, evenly and without rancor, "Yes, the Quebec referendum probably
was defeated by the so-called ethnic vote.  And *thank God*."

I assume that "ethnic", in this context, is simply a euphemism for "not
white and not French".  By that definition...well...yes, the Quebec
referendum was indeed defeated by the ethnic vote, for the prosaic reason
that if you exclude non-whites and non-French, the "Yes" side would have won
(something like 60% of French speakers in Quebec voted "Yes").

I don't believe this is a very controversial thing to observe - or at least
it *shouldn't* be.  It frankly shouldn't be surprising to anyone.  *Of
course* minorities voted against Quebec sovereignty.  Do you think the
xenophobia started with the [Charter][2]?

None of this really matters, of course, because I don't think people were
actually reacting to the truth or falsehood of Parizeau's statements, but
rather to the spirit in which they were given.  What he said may or may not
have been technically true, but that's beside the point.  The point is that
he was being utterly dismissive when he said it.  *That* is what people
found offensive.  He was obliquely implying that the "ethnic vote", as he
called, didn't really count.  He was implying that they weren't real
Quebecers.


[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quebec_referendum,_1995#Immediate_responses
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quebec_Charter_of_Values
