Title: On Billiard Balls and Scorched Cats

I once got into a relatively lively email debate with a friend of mine
concerning the nature of free will. One of us argued that we had it and the
other argued that we didn't. The exchange ended when he sent me an email
explaining that he was agitated and losing sleep over the matter.

My life is weird sometimes.

People hear that story and often assume that my friend was the one who
believed in free will and that I was one who didn't but in reality the
reverse was true.  I believed in free will; my friend did not.

To this day I'm not 100% sure why he got so agitated but I suspect he
thought I was spouting some sort of mystical, new age nonsense and that this
(rightly) irritated him.  If I'm right, that's unfortunate, because that's
about as far away from my views as you can get.

To be clear, I don't actually believe in or practice mysticism of any
kind. But I do believe in free will. In retrospect, I can see how this
stance might be confusing. At least one of my friends has called it
"strange". I think it all harkens back to the way the free will debate is
peddled to the general populace (when people think about it at all).

# Traditional Dichotomies

The free will debate is conventionally framed as a contest between free will
and determinism. Traditionally, these concepts are understood to be mutually
exclusive - if you believe in one, you can't believe in the other. Believing
in determinism means believing that we live in a kind of "clockwork"
universe, where one physical event causes another physical event in an
endless chain going back to the beginning of time. All possible events in
the universe are subject to this causal chain.  In particular, since
*people* are generally considered to be part of the physical universe, and
since their brains are generally considered to be physical objects, and
since their choices are generally considered to be physical events, it can
be said that a person's choices are subject to this causal chain like any
other physical event. A person making a choice, in this kind of universe, is
not really fundamentally different than the operation of any physical system
- like a steam engine, for example.  A really, really *complicated* steam
engine.

People have a hard time imagining what a person's free will (as generally
understood) would even *look like* under such a framework. Where exactly
would it fit among all the swirling particles bumping up against each other
in pre-determined ways? The reason why it's so hard to imagine has to do
with a concept that's normally built into the popular account of free will:
the principle of ["alternative possibilities"][1]. The basic idea here is
simple and intuitive: if a person makes a free choice, let's say choosing
Snickers over Twix, *it must have been possible for her to choose Twix*.
That is to say, if one were to "rewind the universe" to the point just
before the choice was made, and watch the whole thing play out again, it
would still be possible for the person in question to choose Twix over
Snickers. You could do the same thing over and over again, and you wouldn't
be able to reliably predict the outcome.

This particular version of "alternative possibilities" (also known as the
"could have done otherwise" principle) is *completely* at odds with
determinism, which is why many people think that if you want to believe in
free will, you have to reject determinism, which effectively means rejecting
*science* - or at least rejecting the notion that the universe consists
*solely* of swirling particles bouncing off against each other like so many
billard balls (I'm grossly simplifying classical physics for the sake of
argument, but you get the idea). Believing in free will, under this
dichotomy, means believing that human beings somehow have the ability to
step outside the laws of physics when they make a choice. As it is virtually
impossible to describe how such an act is even conceivable, this belief
tends to be equated with a belief in miracles, or mysticism, or some new age
gobbledegook. In other words, it's not to be taken seriously by rationally
minded people.

# A Detour Into Quantum Physics

Of course, people with a certain amount of scientific knowledge understand
that the universe doesn't actually work this way - that the popular image of
the universe as a giant collection of billiard balls hitting each other in
mathematically calculatable ways is patently false. The relevant theory here
is *quantum mechanics*, and it has pretty much shown determinism the
door. Without going into the details (partly because they are not necessary,
but mostly because I don't know them), most interpretations state that
movement of particles in the universe is, to a large extent, completely
random. In this case, "rewinding the universe" really might lead to a
different outcome.

For a while, people thought that quantum mechanics could breathe new life
into the traditional notion of free will but as the years went on it became
clear that there was no easy way to make it work. For one thing, just
because the universe operates in a fundamentally random manner, it doesn't
follow that our brains operate in a similar way. Steam engines, with all
their classical, mathematical predictabilty, didn't suddenly stop working
when quantum mechanics was discovered even though their operation, like
everything else in the universe, is fundamentally based on quantum
mechanical theory. At a high enough level the universe becomes deterministic
and predictable; the question is whether our brains operate at a high enough
level for this to happen.

The problem, though, is more fundamental than that. Even if it were
discovered that quantum mechanical randomness formed an essential,
observable part of the every day operation of our brains, saying that one's
choices are the results of "random fluctuations" hardly seems any better
than saying that they are the result of a series of determined causes. If
it's hard to imagine where free will fits among the pre-determined
trajectories of swirling particles, it's equally hard to imagine where free
will fits among the *completely random* trajectories of swirling particles.

And so we're back to square one. The universe may or may not be
deterministic, our brains may or may be deterministic, but it seems that no
matter how this cake is sliced, there is no room for free will to operate in
this universe unless you reject the science.

# Rejecting the Dichotomy

As I mentioned before, I believe this last part is why my friend became
irritated with me. Given my support for the idea of free will, he thought I
was suggesting that human beings were in some way "magic", that I was in
some way rejecting the notion that humans beings were physical entities,
subject to physical laws. I wasn't, but it's an understandable mistake. The
way the debate is generally portrayed, there really isn't any other way to
think about it.

It's not true, of course; there are *many* different ways to think about
it. The first step is to realize that the free will debate, as it is
traditionally formulated, is founded on a [false dichotomy][2].

When I was in high school, I joined the debate team. I'm not sure what the
rules are elsewhere, but where I went to school, the "affirmative" side got
to define the terms of the debate, while the "negative" side had to accept
those terms. I always thought this was grossly unfair; it seemed to me that
the affirmative side had a huge advantage. What if they defined the terms in
such a way that they couldn't help but win?

To some extent, this sense of unfairness still colours my thoughts. I tend
to think that the point of any debate is really about who gets the right the
use the words involved without the scare quotes. Do you believe, for
example, that gay people can be *married* - or do you believe that gay
people can merely be "married"?

In the case of free will, I think that the reason why people have a hard
time imagining how it could possibly exist in a completely determinitic,
scientific universe is because, to put it bluntly, they're thinking about it
wrong. People want something out of the term that the universe can't
deliver, and this means, in my opinion, that their definitions are *bad*.

Words are slippery things. They come with definitions, yes, but they also
come with baggage and history, conveniently referred to as connotations. The
trick is figuring out which parts of the word are essential and which are
not. At what point does fiddling with the word change its meaning entirely?
At what point are you better off using a completely different word - or
using scare quotes, just to be safe?

Take a word like *life*, for example. Now *there's* a word loaded with
baggage. There was a time, not so long ago, when the word was *drenched* in
religious and mystical connotations. People basically used to believe that
something could only be "alive" if it possessed a kind of non-material "vital
spark" or "Ã©lan vital". That belief, that there is something fundamentally
and intangibly different about the chemistry of living systems as opposed to
non-living systems, is called [vitalism][3] and it's been thouroghly
discredited, basically ever since [urea][4] was first synthesized from
non-organic materials. Most (rationally minded) people don't believe it
anymore.

It's easy to imagine a scientifically-minded skeptic during that period of
upheaval, patting himself on the back for never having believed in any sort
of mystical life force, ridiculing all people who dared to believe that
there was ever anything special about living things. But this person is now
faced with several dilemmas. Should the concept of *life itself* be shunned
as tainted goods? Is it so imbued with religious and mystical significance
that we'd be better off rejecting the concept - and hence the word -
entirely?

It's a definite option. Why not? He could declare his belief, for example,
that *life*, as it had been currently understood, being so intertwined with
the notion of a mysterious vital spark, does not exist. He could declare
that nothing is truly *alive* in the sense of possessing an undetectable
"Ã©lan vital". And he'd be right, of course, as far as that went. He could do
it - but he'd *still* be faced with the simple task of distinguishing
between, let's say, a cat which purrs and eats and runs - and a cat which
does none of these things because someone stabbed it through the heart. Or
between a man who talks and laughs - and one who's lying six feet
underground in a coffin. There's a very clear and obvious contrast to be
made here and words like *alive* and *dead* and *life* all seem to fit the
concepts quite nicely - even if you reject the vitalism with which they used
to come bundled.

Obviously, no one actually took the option I'm suggesting. When scientists
use the word *life*, they don't mean something vastly different than the
average person. Even for hard-nosed atheists, there's a ton of conceptual
overlap between their usage of the word and, let's say, a Catholic's usage
of the word - enough so that we don't bother coming up with a different
word.  Perhaps more to the point, no one would ever say today that we are
misusing the word *life* if we don't believe in the "Ã©lan vital". That's not
to say that no one believes in a life force, just that it's not essential to
the concept of *life*. More likely, we would describe what biologists do
today as *explaining* life rather than denying its existence. This is, I
feel, a profound truth. The denial of vitalism didn't eradicate the concept
of life; it *clarified* it.

# Making Choices

The case of free will is completely analogous. Some people may believe that
the idea *must* come bundled with some sort of ability to step outside the
laws of physics, but why does this have to be the lynchpin of the
definition? Free will, at its most basic, is simply the ability of humans to
deliberate, consider alternatives, and make conscious decisions. The ability
to do what you want to do, and to act in accordance with one's own character
- indeed, the ability to even *have* a character. It has a very [behavioural][5]
component to it. There doesn't have to be anything mystical about it.

In my mind, free will *very obviously* exists. How could it not? We see
people making deliberate, conscious choices every single day. Every time
someone chooses to wear a blue t-shirt over a black one, everytime someone
chooses peanut butter over cream cheese, every time someone decides to go to
the movies over cleaning the apartment. This is what it means to excercise
one's free will. It's nothing more than an observable, natural aspect of
human existence that warrants study and explanation. Denying its existence
is akin to denying the existence of the colour red.

If I said that free will did not exist I would be making the same mistake as
someone who claimed that *life* did not exist because vitalism is false. I
would be underestimating the amount of everyday, unmysterious, behavioural
overlap between my view of the word and someone else's who may be more
religiously minded. I would still be faced with the need to distinguish
between, let's say, murder and suicide, or between rape and sex - very tough
to do unless you have a clear, concrete notion of what it means for
someone's will to be violated, or of what it means to want something as
opposed to not wanting something. In other words, unless you have a clear
notion of free will.

Does it really matter, in the end, if our choices and wants and desires have
ultimately physical causes?  As long as, at the end of the day, you *get to
do what you want* - isn't that enough to say that you have free will?  Why
does there have to be magic involved as well?

Some people will think I'm playing definitional word games here. For alot of
people, a non-negotiable feature of what they would call *free will* must
be, as mentioned before, the ability to "have done otherwise". For every
metaphorical split in the road, it must have been possible for you to pick
the other path. For many, it feels like the science is actively working
against the intuition here - and, if I'm honest with myself, I can see where
they're coming from.

It *seems* irresistable, but is the power to have done otherwise really
necessary to the concept of free will? Simply put, I would argue that it
isn't. A friend of mine loves cats. If someone offered her $100 to set a
kitten on fire, I think I (or anyone) could safely predict what her answer
would be. You could "rewind the universe" as much as you like, and I suspect
her answer would be the same, every single time. What would it even mean, in
this context, to say that she "could have done otherwise"? The idea itself
is incoherent. You'd have to have the ability to *act against your own
character*. Are we suppose to think that there's a parallel universe out
there where my friend, cat lover to the core, decides that today is the day
she starts hating kittens and accepts $100 to set one on fire?

I think part of the problem is that, when people think of determinism, they
tend of think of low level, simplistic physics. They think of a narrative
like this:

> The ivory billiard ball is moving at 30km an hour, at an angle of 43
  degrees. It hits another billiard ball, also made of ivory, which then
  sets off at 17 degrees and 19km an hour. That ball hits a third, identical
  ball, which moves away at 56 degrees and 10km an hour, and falls into the
  side pocket of the table.

People see that and intuitively know that "rewinding the universe" would
have no effect on the narrative - it would always play out the same way. But
I think people extract too much metaphysical significance from that
truth. You can imagine taking a step back and constructing a narrative like
this:

> Donald walks to the corner store because he wants to buy some milk. He
  sees a homeless person on the way and gives him a dollar, like he always
  does. He arrives at the store and sees a litre of organic milk and a litre
  of regular milk, for half as much sitting side by side. He has never in
  his life bought organic anything and sure as hell isn't going to start
  now. He picks up the litre of regular milk and brings it to the cashier,
  who proceeds to ring it up. Donald thinks briefly about what it would be
  like to hold up the store, and steal all the money in the register, but
  this never amounts to anything but idle speculation. He pays for the milk
  and leaves.

There's no fundamental difference between these narratives. They just
describe real events at different levels of abstraction.

In this case,
imagine that "rewinding the universe" also had no effect on the narrative -
Donald does the same thing every time. And yet, this time around, it seems
so...mundane. Donald never buys organic milk - *because he doesn't want to*
not because he doesn't have free will.  He give a dollar to the homeless
person, because *that's what his character demands*, not because he's being
guided like a puppet

 I would have a very
difficult time convincing myself that Donald doesn't have free will. 

I think it's safe to say that a cat lover who decides not to accept a bribe
to set a kitten on fire is still exercising her free will - it would not be
an abuse of the term to apply it in this context.

[1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternative_possibilities
[2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/False_dilemma
[3]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitalism
[4]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Urea
[5]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behaviorism
