---
title: Graffiti and the Art Test
---

If you're in the tech industry, chances are you've heard of the Turing test.
It's usually billed as a litmus test for intelligence in machines (however
you define "intelligence" and however you define "machine").  The idea is
simple: a judge poses a series of questions to subject that may be human or
computer, via some sort of mechanism that hides the physical characteristics
of the subject. If the judge cannot tell the humans from the machines, we
say that the machines are intelligent.  Simple as that.

The Turing test has been a *major* source of controversy in Philosophy of
Mind circles, but the irony is that Turing intended his test to be a way of
*sidestepping* debate.  In his view, asking whether a machine could think
was about as useful as asking whether a submarine could swim; the answer
completely depends on what you mean by "machine" and "think".  These are
questions with very subjective answers, so instead of going down that
particular rabbit hole, he came up with his test.  He thought it was a
reasonable one for a very good reason: we use it to judge the intelligence
of *other people* every single day.  One judges the intelligence of another
person based on conversations with said person.  There's no other way to do
it; you don't get to peer into their brains to watch the gears move.  Why
shouldn't machines be subject to the same treatment?

Keep in mind, you're allowed to ask the machine any question whatsoever on
any subject under the sun.  Ask it to tell you a joke.  Ask it to explain a
joke.  Ask it its opinion on Sarah Palin and the refugee crisis.  You get to
be the judge here.  It's a very hard test to pass in its full glory.

## The Question of Art

I live in Saint Henri, and we have a graffiti problem.  I'd say that most of
Montreal has a graffiti problem, but Saint Henri takes the cake here.

I won't lie.  Graffiti bugs me.  I mean, really, *really* bugs me.  I see
graffiti and I start to use words like "hooligan" and I start itching to
tell people to get off my lawn.  So...I'm biased, I guess.  Keep that in
mind with what follows.

But then I see something like this:

<div style="clear: both; text-align: center;"> 
<img border="0" height="640" width="480" 
     src="/static/images_from_entries/saint_henri_mural.jpg" 
     alt="Saint Henri Mural" />
</div>

And I'm torn.  I *like* that mural.  See? I'm even using the word "mural"
instead of "vandalism", lending it an air of respectability.  So is it
graffiti, or is it art?  Is it both?  Neither?

And, like Turing, I realize this is not a debate one can ever, ever win.  I
mean, is this art?

<div style="clear: both; text-align: center;"> 
<img border="0" height="250" width="153" 
     src="/static/images_from_entries/campbells.jpg" 
     alt="Campbell's Soup Can" />
</div>

I don't know.  Neither do you.  I *shouldn't* be able to win that debate
because the answer is completely subjective and that's good because that
means everyone gets to decide the question for themselves.  I'm all for it.

But we still have that burning, nagging question of what to do with all the
graffiti in Saint Henri.  Have I mentioned, for the most part, that I hate
it?

One of the issues is that there are plenty of people who genuinely like that
stuff.  They actually do see random paint tags as street art.  And art is
good, right?  The graffiti adds a certain flavour to the neighbourhood, as
the argument goes.

Like I keep saying, it's not a debate I can win.  Who am I to say they're
wrong?  There's no accounting for taste, as the cliche goes, and one
person's nice is another person's ugly.

Then again, you know what they say.  If you can't answer a hard question,
then answer an easier one.  Turing did it with his test.  Is there something
like a Turing test for graffiti?  Is there a test that cuts through the
subjectivity and deftly sidesteps a completely futile argument over the
nature of art?

There is, and it's simple.  It's called "property rights", a concept that is
far too often ignored in these sorts of discussions.  Is the graffiti on
someone else's property without their permission?  Then it's vandalism, no
matter how nice of a mural it is.  Is the graffiti on someone else's
property *with* their permission?  Then it's called whatever the hell they
want to call it, including "art" if that tickles their fancy.  Aesthetics
don't, and shouldn't enter into the picture at all.

Yes, my inner curmudgeon is showing.  I don't care.
