---
title: Putting "Meta" In Front of Words Makes Them Sound Cooler, Right?
---

One time, back when I was actually semi-active on Google+, I came across a
rather heated debate.  Someone had posted an [article][1] telling the story
of a child bride who had died on her wedding night.  The post was directed
at self-described proponents of "multiculturalism", an ideology which, in
the poster's opinion, was in the same category as "cultural relativism",
which he considered deeply depraved.

Interestingly, the debate didn't center around whether child marriage was a
horrific practice that needed to be roundly condemned in the harshest terms
possible - pretty much everyone was on the same page on that score - but
rather around the original poster's insistence on conflating
"multiculturalism" and "cultural relativism".  People were insulted; He
wasn't the only one who considered the latter to be an evil philosophy.

One of these days I'm going to write something about how people can become
emotionally attached to, or emotionally repelled by, certain charged
combinations of words.  Think of terms like "euthanasia" or "rape" or "life"
or "free will" or "consciousness" and you'll know what I mean.  I think the
original poster, in this case, had an emotional attachment to his own notion
of "multiculturalism" and seemed unwilling to entertain the idea that other
people might use the word differently.  I, for example, subscribe to a
philosophy that I call "multiculturalism", and yet I have no problem
condemning sati or child marriage.

I don't know the exact, academic definition of "cultural relativism".  The
everyday one off which I tend to base my opinions is that it's a version of
"ethical relativism".  It's the idea that you can't really categorize
cultures or, perhaps more importantly, cultural *practices*, as "good" or
"bad".  Or, to put it more bluntly, it's the idea that one cannot label
female circumcision, or child marriage, or sati as evil because, well,
that's just how they do things over there and who are we to judge?

I'll say it flat out: if *that's* your definition of "multiculturalism",
then it's not a philosophy to which I subscribe - but, then again, I don't
know anyone who does.  I'm no expert, but I believe this is what is called a
"straw man" argument.  One defines a concept in such way that you can't help
but condemn it, but which bears little resemblance to way the concept is
usually used.

All that being said, here's where it gets a little hazy and here's where I
can see some people misconstruing my beliefs.

Like most rational people, I'm unwilling to judge an entire people by the
presence of a few bad apples but, more than that, I'm also unwilling to
judge an entire *culture* by the presence of a few bad *practices*.  To me,
the term "multiculturalism" unpacks to something resembling a form of
libertarianism: a kind of marketplace or buffet of cultures, where you get
to pick and choose the best (or at least neutral) bits from each, and reject
the rest.

Female circumcision is evil.  Praying five times a day facing Mecca is not.
Accepting one does not mean accepting the other.  Cultures are not
*monolithic*.  They are not *package deals*.  Recognizing this truth isn't
ethical or cultural relativism in the sense that I understand it.  I'm very
willing to label certain cultural practices, and the people who observe
them, as unambiguously evil.  But I'm unwilling to *define* an entire
culture by its unsavory elements.  I simply try to pick the wheat from the
chaff, so to speak.

## The Metaculture

I'm pretty conventional when it comes to liberal, western values.  I believe
in free speech, freedom of religion and all that jazz.  There are some
people who take this to mean that I'm not, in fact, a multiculturalist, as
if the belief that there are such things as shared national values somehow
negates the term.

They're wrong.  They are just mistaken as to what the term means.  More
importantly, they are are mistaken as to what a culture is.

I have [said it before][2]: I don't think there is such a thing a strong
Canadian culture, in the same sense that one would refer to a strong French
culture or a strong Chinese culture.  Freedom of speech, freedom of
religion, these *do not count* - not in the way some people think.  These
are not cultural artifacts, from my perspective.  They are basic human
rights.  Far from negating the concept of multiculturalism, they are
neccessary for it to work at all.  They are the basic substrate of civilized
human and cultural interaction.

Together they form, for lack of a better word, a *metaculture* - a culture
*about* cultures.  A general strategy for dealing with people who come from
different parts of the world and who now live together in the same physical
space.  The term is generalized from words like, for example, "metalogic"
(logic about logic) and metablogging (blogging about blogging).

[1]: http://www.upi.com/Top_News/World-News/2013/09/08/8-year-old-Yemeni-girl-dies-from-internal-injuries-on-wedding-night/UPI-61081378653499/?spt=hs&or=tn
[2]: /blog/miscellanea/cultureless
