---
title: The Case of the Missing Vowels
tags: travel
---

Evelyn and I went to Poland this past May, with her dad, uncle and cousins.
Her second cousin was getting married and we were invited to the wedding.

I have to admit, I didn't know what I was going to get out of this trip.
Poland was never really on my list of places to visit.  The Lonely Planet
guide, a book whose job is to make you excited about the place you're
visiting, said that Poland "wore its charms lightly".  Just what was that
supposed to mean?

I mean...one of the main draws of Kraków is a decommissioned salt mine?  A
*salt mine*?

I'm saying all of this to give you a sense of what my feelings were going
in.  They were not the same going out.

(Spoiler alert: the salt mine was *amazing*)

Here's what people told me going in:

 * Polish is a really hard language to learn
 * Kraków is pretty, and Warsaw is not
 * Polish weddings have a crazy amount of food and booze

## Kraków

The first thing I learned about Kraków is that it's not pronounced Kraków.
It's pronounced more like Krakuf - the w's are like v's (and sometimes, as
in this case, like f's) and the accented o's are like u's.  This was my
first indication that I was going to have difficulties with Polish.

The second thing I learned about Kraków is that the Old Town, where we
stayed, is indeed gorgeous.  It mostly survived World War 2 and the
Communists mostly left it alone.  The same cannot be said of other cities in
Poland, like Warsaw.  Evelyn's uncle had rented an apartment very close by,
so we were pretty lucky here.

The Old Town of Kraków is, for lack of a better term, pleasantness on
steroids.  Pretty buildings, cobblestone streets, charming cafes and
restaurants.

This is a theme that would crop up again and again.  Poland is *pleasant*.
When you visit Paris or Athens you can almost feel the weight of hundreds of
years of global history bearing down on you - and you are sharing the
experience with throngs upon throngs of tourists.  In Poland, a lot of the
history (with the large, glaring exception of war history) is local and
self-contained - this famous Polish person did this famous Polish thing at
this famous Polish location, so the significance is often lost on
foreigners.

The first evening's meal was just myself, Evelyn and her dad (the rest of
her family was arriving the next day), and it was spent at a local pierogi
house.  Pretty cliche, I know, but the place also served [zurek][1], which I
was desperate to try.  So I learned a couple of more things that night:

 * Poland is inexpensive for someone from Canada.  A very filling meal will
   not cost you more than $15 Canadian at, it must a be said, a tourist trap.
 * I love zurek and I want to learn how to make it.

## Wieliczka

It was a couple of days afterwards that we went to [Wieliczka][2] - the
aforementioned decommissioned salt mine.

I had my doubts.  A salt mine?  A *salt mine*?  How is this interesting? But
peer pressure won out, and people kept telling me that it was worth it.  Shrug.
We went.

So, it turns out it's not just a salt mine.  If it were just a salt mine, I
think the whole excursion would have been a lot less interesting.  It's a
salt mine, yes, but it's *also*

 * a large collection of rooms and sculptures carved out of salt rock
 * [a gigantic, underground working Cathedral][3], again carved entirely out of
   salt rock.
 * gift shops, reception halls, restaurants

It reminded me a bit of Asimov's fabled [Caves of Steel][4].  I could easily
imagine a whole apartment complex being built down there.

The salt mine, surprisingly, was one of the highlights of the trip. The
Cathedral alone was worth the price of admission.

## Łuków

Our next stop after Kraków was Łuków, a smallish town in northeast Poland.
The wedding was to take place in Siedlce, which is a short drive from Łuków,
and we were staying with some of Evelyn's relatives.

### A Brief Linguistic Detour

Like Kraków, the first thing I learned about Łuków was how to pronounce it.
You do not, as you might imagine, just sound out the letters.  No, the
decorations *mean* something and, in this case, a line through an 'l' makes
it a 'w'.  So the town is actually pronounced Wukuf.

For a little while, this threw me for a loop. You put a line through an 'l
it becomes a 'w'?  This seemed completely random and I didn't understand it
at all.

At some point during the trip, I learned that the word for Polish sausage is
actually spelled kiełbasa, and not kielbasa as I had hitherto thought, which
means that I've been spelling and pronouncing it wrong all this time.  It
actually sounds like kiewbasa.

And, at first, this made things seem even more hopeless for me.  I mean, I
actually *know* the word kiełbasa - except that I didn't.  Not at all.  This
didn't bode well.

Then, of course, you realize that if you say kiewbasa really fast, it could
almost be mistaken for kielbasa, which I'm sure makes complete sense to
someone which a background in linguistics, but which seemed like a new
discovery for me.  And that made me feel a bit better.

So maybe the connection between l and ł isn't so random after all.

### Wedding

At any rate, Evelyn and I got to see a bit of Łuków which, after Kraków, was
less interesting.  Nonetheless, our host and hostess were generous with the
food and the booze and the attention, and we were grateful.

They were quite tolerant - a lot of my time there consisted of me shouting
basic but totally mangled Polish words like "toothpaste" and "door" at them.
If they were annoyed they never showed it.

The wedding itself is deserving of a few paragraphs.  Everyone says the same
thing about Polish weddings, namely that there is a lot of food and a lot of
booze.  Did it measure up?  Let's find out!

The reception begins around 6pm.  You are led into a big room with lots of
tables.  You sit down and you immediately notice two things:

 * the tables are laden with a bewildering variety of finger foods - fish,
   eggs, salads, jellied meats of every race and religion.
 * the tables are all in possession of various bottles of soft drinks and an
   ice bucket containing bottles of vodka

There is also a common deli station with sausage, terrine, etc., a dessert
station with different cakes, a coffee station and a wine and booze station
(in addition to the vodka on the tables).  I hasten to add that all this
greeted us upon entering the room.  It was not brought out later.

My attempts to nibble at bit of salad was met with a stern admonition of
"No, it's for later".  Alright then.

We sit down. We take a shot of vodka.  The soup comes out. It's tasty.  The
main course comes out. It's roast pork with potatoes and vegetables.  Also
tasty.  We take another shot of vodka.  The panna cotta comes out for
dessert (but there's a dessert station!  What is going on?) and, not wanting
to buck the trend, it was also tasty.

You take another shot of vodka and everyone starts dancing.  Phew, we're
done!  That wasn't so bad.  I mean, the portions were pretty big and,
combined with the deli station, dessert station, and all the hors d'oeuvres,
one could indeed call that a lot of food, but I think I handled it like a
boss.

I think that deserves some cake and coffee, which I will proceed to procure
at the dessert station.  LIKE AN IDIOT.

Because, of course, as I'm bringing the cakes back to my table, everyone
takes a break from the dancing to sit down to *second dinner*.  Second
dinner is very similar to first dinner - a plate of roast meat with potatoes
and cabbage, almost as big as the first.  Oh, and another shot of vodka.

(By this time, I had gotten wise to the whole thing and I was taking sips,
not shots.  Nobody seemed to care.)

And as you're finishing, you're thinking to yourself "This is it, right?
We're done!  Anything more would just be silly".  And everyone gets up to
dance again as if in confirmation of your thoughts.  Notably, no one is
raiding the dessert station yet.

Third dinner arrives some time later.  It's a kebab with cabbage
and rice. I almost cried.  It was followed by yet more dancing.

And I do mean dancing.  Everyone knows how to dance here, men included.
Hell, *children* included.  There was one kid doing that Russian kicking
dance. The band would play an unfamiliar song, except that it would be
instantly recognized by everyone in the room, and everyone would know
exactly the dance that was supposed to go with it, and would proceed to
demonstrate said dance in an energetic and enthusiastic manner.  Needless to
say, it was intimidating, especially considering that I have no sense of
rhythm whatsoever.

Around 2:30 in the morning, you're tired and sweaty and drunk and
embarrassed.  It's at this moment that they choose to ambush you with
borscht and sauerkraut rolls.  I wasn't even surprised anymore.  It was
after this, and only after this, do I see people helping themselves to cake.

So...yeah.  A lot of food.

## Warsaw

The first thing I learned about Warsaw was how to pronounce it.  Or, rather,
I learned that the Polish name for Warsaw is Waszawa, which by this time I
could, thankfully, pronounce (it's Warshava).

The second thing I learned was that Warsaw, like Kraków, has an Old Town,
but it's different.  It's lovely and all, but it's...new.  A new Old Town.
The old Old Town was destroyed during World War 2.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sour_rye_soup
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wieliczka_Salt_Mine
[3]: https://photos.desmondrivet.com/picture.php?/1119/category/52
[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Caves_of_Steel
