---
title: On Travelling to the Land of Socrates
tags: travel,greece
---

Evelyn and I decided, on a whim, to travel to Greece this year. We went for
ten days.

This is the first time we've ever been overseas without knowing anyone at
the other end.  The one time we were in Europe together, in Lyon, we stayed
at a friend's apartment.

Our itinerary consisted of Athens, followed by Santorini, Rhodes, Delphi and
then Athens again.  This is quite a bit of moving about and I feel like we
saw a lot while simultaneously seeing very little.  Greece is the kind of
country where you can spit and hit a 2000 year old ruin.  This is only a
slight exaggeration.  We are, after all, talking about the cradle of Western
civilization.  You can't hope to see even a fraction of all there is to see
in only 10 days.

## Athens

We landed in Athens, and stayed at a centrally located Airbnb. 

First impressions of Athens: very noisy, very crowded, very dirty, and very
grafittied.  In other words, I am unimpressed.

My opinion changes somewhat the closer I get to the Acropolis.  There is
something surreal about this...fort? temple?...sitting proud and high on its
hill, keeping watch over the city.  

It takes a while to sink in that it's over 2000 years old, and was built at
a time when people *believed the myths*.  The whole idea is so weird that it
needs time to marinate a bit before I can appreciate the full impact.
*There was a time when people believed in Zeus, and this temple is proof*.
Did people have the same arguments back then?  Did some people believe in
the literal truth of the myths, while others insisted that they were only to
be interpreted metaphorically?

## Santorini

First impressions of Santorini: very noisy, very crowded.  In other words, I
am unimpressed.

## Rhodes

## Delphi

## Learning Greek

I live in Montreal, which means I have at least *some* knowledge of the
French language.  I am not, by any stretch of the imagination, *fluent* in
said language.  Frankly, I'm not even very good.  My French, basically, is
terrible.

But while my French may be terrible, it is at least *there*.  I'm generally
able to ask for directions, order a meal from a menu, read the road signs,
and even to some extent carry on a conversation, if I keep my words short
and avoid slang.  When someone says a word in French, I'll stand a chance of
being able to match it up with a series of letters on paper, even if the
word is unfamiliar.

This is even true, albeit to a much smaller degree, with a language like
Italian or Spanish.  When I see something written in Italian, I don't
understand (most of) the words.  But I do understand, more or less, the
letters, and I *can* at least approximate how the word sounds.  When someone
says something in Italian I can, like French, generally match it up to a
series of letters on paper, even if I don't know what the word means.  The
sounds, and how they are visually represented, are at least somewhat
familiar to me.

All this goes out the window when confronted with Greek.  Greek presents a
double problem.  On the one hand, I don't know any of the words.  On the
other hand, I don't even know what the words look like on paper.  When I'm
confonted with a language like that, I begin to appreciate just how much
French I really know.

After about a day in Athens, some very rudimentary Greek could not help but
force its way in.  The experience was, for me, an excercise in correlating
and synthesizing various random snippets of half-forgotten linguistic
anecdotes and life experiences into some kind of semi-coherent whole.

For example, I have an engineering degree and Greek letters are often used
to represent various mathematical quantities and concepts.  So we have pi,
of course, but also tau, epsilon, alpha, delta, theta, mu, omega, sigma and
lambda, etc.

Next comes the rather arbitrary leap - you assume that the letters roughly
correspond to English equivalents.  You assume, for example, that 'alpha'
sounds vaguely like an 'a'.  Why?  Well...because alpha begins with 'a', of
course!  It's not very scientific, but it seems to mostly work.  Similarly,
epilon sounds vaguley like an 'e' and mu sounds vagulay like an 'm'.  You
get the idea.
