Joining the rest of mankind...

So I've finally gotten a blog. They've only been around for, what? Ten
years? I guess I'm not a bandwagon jumper.

Lately though, there've been a couple of instance where a) I've had an
opinion that I wanted to share with the world and b) I didn't feel
like writing a full-blown essay to express it. I guess this is where a
blog fits the bill.

Anyway, after reviewing various blogging options I've finally settled
on [Blosxom](http://www.blosxom.com) as my blogging tool. At the
moment I think this is the best option for me because:

* it's extremely lightweight. The core package consists of a single
  Perl script having less than 500 lines.

* it doesn't use a database. Blog entries are just text files, and can
  be edited with your favourite text editor. Databases, in my opinion,
  are overused in these sorts of applications.

* there's no PHP to set up, no special Apache modules to install,
  unless you count mod_cgi, which I don't because it's pretty standard
  on most Apache installations.

* the HTML is completely customizable by hand. I don't like
  applications which spit out HTML I can't control.

Also, I didn't want to simply get an account on one of the many
blogging sites available. This goes a bit deeper than me wanting to
different, or being paranoid about my blog entries living on someone
else's computer. I've noticed that personal websites seem to be on the
decline, people instead opting for a collection of accounts on various
online communities. So, for example, someone will get themselves an
account on Blogger for their blog, followed by an account on Flickr
for their photos, followed by an account on del.icio.us for their
links. Although these applications are, in some cases, quite
impressive and original, the idea of spreading your web presence over
different URLs just seems...wrong to me.

It seems to be standard practice for a blog page to provide a link to
a Flickr account, for example, which of course has a completely
different layout and colour scheme. I find it jarring.

I think, for the moment, that I prefer the old style website. If I
want to share photos with my friends and family, I want to put them on
my website, not a Flickr account. If I want people to read my blog, I
want to point them to my website, not a Blogger page. I want to
provide my readers, if I have any at all, with an integrated web
experience.
