---
title: In Defense Of Emacs
---

When I use Linux, I almost always use emacs, even though the usual
alternatives are at my disposal. Among my friends, I am apparently in the
minority on this issue. I am the only person I know of who *chooses* to use
emacs. In fact, just to drive the point home, I'd even say that if there
were no emacs for Linux, I'd think twice about using Linux.

Most of my friends use pico. Pico is not the worst text editor in the world
(that spot would have to be reserved for vi), but am I the only one annoyed
by the fact that I can't seem to use the mouse to position my cursor or that
cutting and pasting don't seem to work like they're supposed to? Is there an
option I'm missing here? This works fine in emacs...

A significant percentage of my collegues laud the virtues of vi. To this
day, I still don't see the appeal of this program. I don't understand how
people can use a application whose name harkens back to the days when
"visual" text editing was still a novelty. I don't understand how people can
praise a program where deleting a mistake, moving the cursor around, and
inserting text are all done in *different modes*. The lone edge vi has to
offer is it's size: it's very small. To those who consider this an actual
advantage, I have just one word: upgrade! The 70's ended when the 80's
began.

The usual gripe I hear is that emacs takes up to much memory. This complaint
is usually associated with the quip (only half meant in jest) that emacs is
*really* an acronym for <u>e</u>ventually <u>m</u>alloc()'s <u>a</u>ll
<u>c</u>omputer <u>s</u>tore. The gripe is half justified; emacs does take
up more memory than your average lightweight text editor. As for the notion
that it takes up *too much* memory, I suppose this depends on what you're
trying to accomplish. After all, most people don't slam a graphics program
for being a memory hog. It's all part of the package. The extra memory is
needed to do its job. By the same token, emacs is more than just your
run-of-the-mill text editor. In addition to ordinary features like automatic
syntax highlighting and automatic indentation while you type, emacs provides
facilities to check your spelling, read your email, read your newsgroups,
surf the Wold Wide Web, keep a diary, display a calander, mark important
dates, run a shell, run programs from said shell, compile and debug your
source code, automatically generate boxed comments, check out and merge
files from CVS repositories, act like a psychotherapist, play the towers of
Hanoi, plus a million other little tidbits, *all from directly inside the
editor itself*.

Add to this the fact that every single one of these features is *insanely*
customizable and you have the makings of an *extremely* powerful tool. Such
power requires memory. Emacs is not just a text editor, anymore than a
computer is just a calculator. It is a powerful Integrated Development
Environment (IDE) with features that put many other IDE's to shame. A person
with the appropriate skills can conceivably spend his or her entire day in
an emacs window without ever feeling constrained.

In the spirit of objectivity, I will throw a bone to my enemies and admit
that using emacs for something like spot text corrections is like using a
rocket launcher to kill a fly. But using emacs *just* for text editing,
without taking advantage of all the modes and features available, is like
using Matlab to help you with your Grade 4 arithmetic homework. It is
something you only attempt when you have memory to spare. Or if you don't
know vi :-)

With the development of advanced IDE's, some people might claim that emacs
is now obsolete. As far as the first part of this statement goes, the second
part is partly true. The problem is that there are precious few advanced
IDE's available for Linux that are as stable as emacs, that posess the same
flexibility and that aren't in version 0.1. As little as 5 years ago, the
situation was even worse. Emacs was really the only choice of profesionals
who wished to get any work done on Linux systems and who did not have a
fortune to spend.

This is slowly changing, of course. IDE's are becoming increasingly
available. I hear that CodeWarrior is pretty good. There are apparently
others.

Of course, none of these IDE's will let you read your mail, or post a
newsgroup message, or keep a diary. They won't let you play a game if you
want a break. They're of little value if you want to edit a TeX file
efficiently or if you want to check your spelling. People are always touting
the value of "all-in-one" software. Emacs takes this concept to new
heights. In the end, it is my belief that emacs will continue on as the IDE
of choice for people who are serious about programming big projects on a
UNIX system.
