Title: Site Design and Layout

At the moment, this site is mostly an experiment in python.  The pages and
the blog are all delivered via a home-grown blogging system/CMS that I've
called [YAWT](https://github.com/drivet/yawt) (Yet Another Weblog Tool),
written in python.  It's a work in progress.  At some point, maybe I'll
write a page about it.

The graphic used for the site header is a photo of the Montreal skyline,
taken from the balcony of my former apartment.

I've made the HTML as simple and as standards compliant as I could.  For the
most part, the stuff on this site should look okay in older and text based
browsers, as long as you turn off the CSS. As I have no sense of aesthetics,
I've used [twitter bootstrap](http://twitter.github.com/bootstrap/) as a
starting point for the styling.  I've avoided javascript where I could,
though it's still used for the responsive features.

The search bar at the top will search the whole site, which for now just
means my blog and standalone pages. I have very vague plans to implement a
photo gallery engine, and if that ever takes shape, I'm hoping the search
bar will included the photos as well.

In addition, certain parts of the site are password protected (right now
just the wiki, but perhaps other areas in the future).  I found that too
many people were trying to edit and create new accounts on the wiki, which
was hogging alot of resources on my relatively low end VPS.  Rather than
turning off the features, I just password protected the areas in question,
and whitelisted the IP addresses from which I usually access the wiki.  This
seems to work, and everything seems to be alot faster, but I'm a little sad
that I had to take this step.
