title: Endless Streets and Fedoras
date: 2018-11-06 10:04:27
modified: 2018-11-06 10:04:27
status: draft

## Manhattan

As you walk down a typical street in Manhattan the first thing you notice is
just how _straight_ it is.  Roads in Manhattan have actual vanishing points,
like railroad tracks.  You walk slowly along and you watch the cross streets
come up one at a time, at perfectly spaced intervals and at perfectly right
angles, and you look down _those_ streets and you're taken aback at how
perfectly straight _they_ are as well, and how _they_ seem to go on forever.

Manhattan is entirely made up of endless streets.  It's so big you that feel
like you're missing out on most of it, like each road you don't go down is a
lost opportunity, a closed door, a story you'll never get to hear.  You feel
like there are countless Woody Allen movies going on at the same time but
you'll never know anything about them because you didn't choose to walk down
those roads.

Weirdly, Manhattan can also feel claustrophobic. You feel like you're
jostling for space with every other inhabitant of the City.  The buildings
are mind-numbingly tall, and some of them are even beautiful, but you rarely
see them "in the distance", and you often have to crane your neck to get a
good view.

## Chicago

New York City is home to countless stories but Chicago is home to just one.
It's a good one, though, and it takes place at night, in the rain, with
slick, shiny roads reflecting garish and lurid neon signs above an endless
parade of shady establishments.  It's a story populated by men who wear
fedoras and carry guns and conduct questionable business in secret alleyways
beneath the L train, and with dangerous, dagger wielding women who wear
blood-red lipstick and blood-red evening gowns and blood-red shoes.  Women
who'll kill you with a disdainful, dismissive look _before_ they plant a
knife in your back.

Chicago does not feel as claustrophobic as Manhattan.  The streets are wider
and the skyscrapers are laid bare in front of you like a metropolis-sized
picnic made of concrete and steel, inviting you - nay, _daring_ you! - to
gawk.  The buildings look like they belong in a different era, for the
simple reason that they _do_ belong to a different era, and it's almost as if
your eyes begin to involuntarily develop the ability to see the world in
sepia.
