title: Why I'll Never Be a Good Speller
tags: language
md_create_time: 2007-06-11T16:13:04+00:00

English spelling is notoriously...arbitrary. Any and all attempts to
pin down a spelling rule will be met with at least six different
exceptions - and you can be sure that the exceptions will be words
that you will actually want to use. A study in English spelling is
basically a study in evolutionary history. It's a study of various
French invasions and vowel shifts. And, most of all, it's an exercise
in brute memorization.

Contrast this with mathematics. Useful mathematical results are
*derived* from previous mathematical results, using nothing but pure
logic. A mathematical result is what it is because it *had* to be that
way. A mathematical result simply couldn't be anything else and still
make sense. Note that this is, more or less, the exact *opposite* of
what one can say about English spelling conventions.

I'm fairly confident that if my life depended on it, I could prod
myself into being a decent English speller, given enough time. The
trouble, of course, is that on some fundamental, possibly
sub-conscious level, I don't *want* to be one. I have distinct trouble
remembering arbitrary data. I just can't convince my brain that it's
important enough to stick. Math on the other hand, has
structure. Theorems follow from axioms or other theorems. Math has
both rhyme and reason. English spelling has neither.

For the very same reasons, I'll never be a lawyer or doctor
either. Talent is beside the point; I may or may not have the chops to
be a lawyer, but even if I did, I wouldn't want to be one. The study
of law (or anatomy) is similar to the study of English spelling. Your
job is to try and make some sense out of an arbitrarily tortured and
tangled mountain of spaghetti. Why do humans have an appendix? There
is an answer, of course, involving evolution and mutation, but it's
probably uninteresting to the task at hand, which is to figure out how
to remove it without killing your patient. Why are Canadians taxed at
X percent if their salary is below Y dollars?  There is an answer, of
course, involving various political compromises, back door
arrangements and the phase of the moon, but it's probably
uninteresting to the task at hand, which is to figure out how much you
have to pay so that you can avoid going to jail. Why is the word
describing a metal clad person with a jousting fetish spelled
K-N-I-G-H-T when the K, G and H serve no purpose except to confuse the
issue? There is an answer, of course, involving the evolution of Old
English into Modern English via the Norman Invasion and the Great
Vowel Shift, but it's probably uninteresting to copy editors who just
want to make sure that the word is constructed in the agreed upon
fashion.

That's not to say I don't respect doctors, lawyers and copy-editors;
of course I do. I'm not that narrow-sighted, and I obviously know that
it has to be *someone*'s job to know the human body, or Canada's law
system, or how to spell. And I'm not claiming that laws are
complicated *simply* so that lawyers can have a job. I'm aware of the
dangers of ambiguous language, and I'm aware of the need to create a
specialized jargon for something as important as the rules of
society. And I'm aware that one should spell one's words correctly in
formal situations if one wishes to avoid looking like an idiot. And
I'm obviously aware of the value of doctors. But factor in the sheer
*randomness* of it all and, well, It's just not something I can
imagine enjoying myself.
