---
title: Why Watching "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" Is Not a Waste of Time
tags: television
md_create_time: 2008-02-27T14:52:50+00:00
---

I've been recently spending a significant amount of my free time
watching "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" and "Angel" on DVD. I never
watched them when they were on the air, but now I'm catching up.

This has earned me accusations of being hypocritical, since I
apparently tend to be critical of people who spend (what I consider to
be) too much time watching TV.

Well...yes and no.  I don't think I'm critical of people who spend a
lot of time watching TV. How could I be? I watch a lot of TV myself. I
*am*, on the other hand, critical of people who spend a lot of time
*channel surfing*.

I am not going to try and convince everyone that "Buffy" and "Angel"
are worth watching - at least, not in this posting :) People obviously
have different opinions on this, and suffice it to say that I find the
episodes well-written and entertaining enough to keep me tuned in (so
to speak - these are DVDs after all).  For whatever reason, I have
made a conscious, explicit decision to watch every episode.

Hence, it doesn't make a difference whether I watch all the episodes
in one big lump or whether I ration them out over a period of several
years.  I'm not wasting my time because it is my intention to
eventually plow through them all.

Contrast this with the practice of channel surfing, in which you
randomly flip through a series of channels until you finally settle on
the program that seems the least awful.  You would never go out of
your way to watch this program and the only reason you do is because
its timeslot and your sofa-sitting time happen to coincide.

*That* counts as a waste of time.  It's the practice of "watching TV"
as opposed to specifically "watching X" (where X is whatever television
program you please) that I object to.
