title: What it means to have an opinion
md_create_time: 2007-06-11T16:12:39+00:00

I have strong opinions on certain topics, but unlike some people I
know, I try to justify my opinions (see, for example, my [philosophy
page](http://branchcut.ath.cx:12108/~dcr/philosophy/index.html)). Whether I succeed or not is
another matter, but I think that the attempt at justification deserves
at least *some* credit. And I've been known to change my mind if I'm
convinced I'm wrong.

I take a somewhat dim view of the idea that all opinions matter, or
that no one is ever wrong. I know at least one or two people who seem
offended whenever anyone tried to point out flaws in their ideas. I
think this goes beyond not being able to handle criticism; they are of
the belief that every opinion has a bit of right in it. I know other
people who consider it the height of rudeness to try and convince
another person to change his or her beliefs. There's a tendency today
to treat opinions like an outgrowth of your body, like a limb, and to
equate the desire to change it with the desire to cut off one's
hand. With this sort of attitude, one does not *debate* so much as
*exchange ideas*.

I never understood this stance. Yes, the exchange of ideas is
important, but what's the point of having an opinion if you don't
believe said opinion is the correct one - or, at least, on the right
track? I mean, why else would you have it in the first place? Because
you like the colour? And if you believe that your opinion is at least
partially correct, why on earth would you not try to convince other
people?

Note that I said *convince*, not *bludgeon into
submission*. Obviously, one should not force one's opinions on anyone
else. By force I mean physically force - your opinion ends where
another person's nose begins. And note also that an attempt at
persuasion does not count as physical force.

This is why I have absolutely no problem with, say, Baptist Christians
passing out flyers saying that non-believers will suffer eternal
hellfire, or Jehovah's Witnesses coming to my door to explain why they
think blood transfusions are evil. These people have a right to their
opinions and a right to evangelize. I, in turn, have the right to
consider their beliefs utterly ludicrous, and to tell them so -
bluntly - if I want. If the conversation turns physical, then there
would be a problem, but there would be a problem with anyone getting
coercive in this manner, regardless of the context.

At the end of the day, it is up to the individual to decide for him or
herself what the truth is. This is not the same as saying that every
opinion has merit, or that there's no such thing as universal truth or
falsehood. It's nothing more than a statement of jurisdiction and
jealous sovereignty over one's own soul.
