Religion Versus Culture

In the past, I've
[commented](http://branchcut.blogspot.ca/2012/06/on-banning-of-niqabs-im-bit-late-to.html)
on France's ban of the niqab, noting in passing that the distinction some
people make between religion and culture (emphasizing, for example, that the
niqab is a Middle Eastern cultural tradition rather than a specific Islamic
law), is irrelevant to question of whether a woman has the right to wear
whatever the hell she wants in public - including, of course, a niqab if
that's what floats her boat.

At the time, I more or less glossed over what I thought the actual
distinction was between culture and religion, so with that in mind I'd like
to expand a little on these thoughts and make the further claim (not so very
controversial, I think) that the line between religion and culture tends to
be blurry at best and, at worst, damn near non-existent.  

Take Christmas, for example.  Christmas, in most of the western world, is
celebrated on December 25th.  Is that a religious or cultural fact?  Note
that, hard as you might try, you will not find a date for Christmas in the
Bible.

How about the Catholic admonition concerning the consumption of meat on
Fridays?  Again, this prohibition doesn't exist in the Bible, and it's not
even followed in every variant of Christianity.  So does that mean it's a
cultural tradition as opposed to a religious one?

How about a nun's outfit?  You know, the penguin suit?  Culture or religion?

Adam and Eve ate an apple from the Tree of Knowledge and were consequently
banished from the Garden of Eden, right?  Wrong, as it turns out - nowhere
in the Bible does it say they ate an apple.  So, this business of the apple
- culture or religion?  Maybe tradition?  Is there a difference?

Would you classify [Paradise
Lost](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradise_lost) as religious literature?
That story, about the fall of Lucifer and his subsequent transformation into
Satan, is not told anywhere in the Bible.  There is certainly a
well-established Christian tradition surrounding the fall of Lucifer, but
it's not what you'd call *dogma*.

Are you detecting a theme? If you're going to argue that a particular
practice or tradition only counts as "religious" if it's explicitly outlined
in the holy book of said religion, you're going find that the vast majority
of practices or traditions that one would normally and rightfully think of
as religious are, in fact, anything but.  The lesson one should take from
that observation, in my opinion, is that it's ridiculous, in many cases, to
draw significant distinctions between religion, culture and tradition.

A practice is religious if it forms an essential part of your religious
life.  If the practice or tradition is encouraged by a member of your
religious leadership, if the norms of this practice or tradition are
maintained by said religious leadership, if you are encouraged or forced to
participate in this practice or tradition on pain of religious or social
persecution (one and the same, in many cases), then said practice counts
as "religious", whether or not it's explicitly laid out in your particular
holy book.

So, avoiding meat on Fridays?  It's a religious practice because it is
encouraged and prescribed by Catholic authorities.  Covering your face in
public?  Also a religious practice, even if the Koran is notably silent on
the subject.

Now, I *do* understand that making a distinction between Middle Eastern
culture and Islam is often simply an attempt to combat Islamophobia, and I
do sympathize in spirit, but I think there are better ways to do that.  One
first step would be to simply acknowledge that there are, in fact, variants
of Islam which advocate forcing a woman to cover her face in public, and to
be clear that one disapproves of such variants.  You can, of course, be
crystal clear that not all variants of Islam advocate such practices, but
trying to claim that they aren't part of at least *some* of them is
analogous to saying that the tradition of avoiding meat on Fridays is not
part of Catholicism.  It's a hair splitting exercise that serves no one.
